but even for somebody like me who is
fundamentally secular in my
understanding of the universe it is
pretty clear that there is something
that is reasonably described as a
spiritual Dimension to the battle that
we are engaged in not only does the
opposition appear to be playing with
demonic tropes for reasons I can
scarcely imagine but something well
beyond our well-being as a modern people
is at stake our ability to continue is
at
[Music]
stake hello everybody I had the
opportunity today to speak to Brett
Weinstein and Heather haying with whom
I've had many discussions um always a
pleasure we concentrated on two issues
today and then branched out into many
others the first is Brett's plan
to f a celebration in Washington DC on
the 29th of
September um the movement is rescue the
Republic the website is join the
resistance.org
www.join theresistance
.org on X the handle is at rescue
Republic okay so that's on the 29th of
September what is that well that's what
we discussed that was one of the main
issues we discussed it's a celebration
it brings together musicians and
Comedians and speakers what would you
say of the of the alternative media of
the alternative entertainment Enterprise
of the alternative politic system that
seems to be gathering itself around
Trump Kennedy will speak there telsey
gabard for example all the speakers
haven't yet been identified I'm going to
attend so this is an invitation to all
of you to come to that on the 29th you
can get as I said you can get
information at join the resistance.org
so we talked about that we talked about
and then we talked
more philosophically scientifically
about the convergence
that Heather and Brett and I all see
between the Advanced findings of
evolutionary biology and the
proclamations let's say the historical
historically grounded proclamations of
the theologians and the religious types
and and that that was associated with a
conversation we also had about Peterson
Academy this new online university that
launched three weeks ago Heather and
Brett lecture there but so do a number
of the figures on the more cognitive
science and Theological side who seem to
be integrally involved in this
integration this new integration uh John
Veri and Jonathan Paso perhaps first and
foremost among them and so we Tangled
all that together in our discussion and
so uh join us for
a evolutionary biological SL theological
analysis of the current political
situation as well as something like a
call to
Celebration September 29th in Washington
DC well it's good to see you too Brad I
think the last time we spoke publicly
was about five months ago we talked
about the Darian Gap and postmodernism
and I know that um well there's a
variety of things we have to talk about
today I wanted to open maybe just to uh
congratulate you guys on your Peterson
Academy lecture which is among the most
popular offerings on the site and so we
launched that 3 weeks ago with
pre-enrollment the formal launch was on
September 9th we have 31,000 students at
the moment and so and it looks like it's
going extremely well the we're curating
the social media part of it carefully we
want to produce a social media Network I
think we have produced it actually
that's very positive you know without
being naive and sentimental and we're
very careful about um
what would you say rewarding the kind of
behavior you might like to see if what
you were trying to do was promote
University level civilized discourse and
we're hoping as well that the because
this is an open question technologically
you know like what are the preconditions
for an iterable non degenerating social
media game in the long medium to long
run and the answer is nobody knows right
nobody knows the answer to that question
so we're hoping that the fact that
there's a substantial entry fee I mean
it's a reasonable fee and the price that
we've set Peterson Academy at seems to
be very acceptable to the to our
students we we've got positive feedback
on that but it's a high enough bar as
far as I'm concerned so that it'll
screen out the Bots and the trolls and
the bad casual corporate actors and the
manipulators and then you know we're
also monitoring Behavior without being
too heavy-handed about it to make sure
that you know the all caps crowd and the
derisive Psychopaths don't get free
reain which seems to be what happens in
a social media Network that's free
anyways we've got 20 courses up already
we've got 30 more in the pipeline like
like recorded already and then we're
sketching out a full two-year curriculum
not looks it all looks great and your
course has proved to be particularly
popular and so hooray for that well it's
fantastic to see you Jordan um
congratulations on launching Peterson
Academy that's a huge accomplishment in
and of itself and we're very excited
that uh our course is apparently popular
on the
site it's fascinating how you described
the social media approach which is not
something um I was otherwise aware of
but of course I'm aware of the social
media landscape in general and how one
has to negotiate these things and it
feels to me like an amazing
I don't know if it's Counterpoint or uh
follow on to some of what we're trying
to do in the course that we have done
for prod and Academy so far which is
we're trying something new it's not what
we do in that I think we called it
evolutionary inference course it's not
something we've done before where we
invited students to play what we're
calling evolutionary Jeopardy um
following from the observation that when
you see an organism in the world they
are manifesting evolutionary answers to
ecological questions conditions
constraints opportunities uh that you
may not be aware of and our job as
biologists and um also you know as a
psychologist uh in in the human
landscape is to figure out what the
conditions constraints opportunities
what the questions were uh that produced
the thing that you've now got in front
of you and so that's all assuming that
you have an answer for which there is a
plausible credible not necessarily
static but um consistent to some degree
across uh time question that you are now
seeing the answer to whereas what you're
trying to navigate with producent
Academy and the social media landscape
is oh my goodness you know is is there a
stable uh ecological condition as it
were uh that there is an answer to that
can't be gamed uh that can that that's
that's exactly right that's exactly
right well I actually think to some
degree that that's that the deeper you
go into the philosophical hierarchy the
farther down the hierarchy you go
towards fundamental assumptions the more
what you're actually seeing are um
iterated attempts to answer exactly that
question so the question would be
something like what's the what's the
optimal game playable by the largest
number of people extending over the
largest span of time perhaps that
incrementally improves as you play it
right and what are the preconditions for
that and one of the things I've been
thinking about with regards to the
social media landscape is that what
we're what we're contending with with
the big Tech networks that are free is
the proclivity of attentional resources
to be parasitized by Psychopathic
Predators essentially but by predatory
parasites which by the way is the
definition of a psychopath the predatory
parasites will game attentional
resources if they have free reign to do
so because they're extremely valuable
and so you need barriers of a variety of
sort or con consequences with regards to
that non-reciprocal behavior or the
system gets gamed entirely I Believe by
the parasitical par uh predators and
then it comes crashing down now and I
would also say possibly that they're in
favor of it crashing down in some deep
way because their mode of reproduction
even short-term mating let's say
short-term exploitative mating is
actually likely more successful in
extremely chaotic conditions so now the
issue would be well how do we set up a
communicative landscape that rewards
truly reciprocal altruism let's say and
that keeps the predatory parasites at
Bay and we actually don't know how to do
that in Virtual space especially with
the anonymous types because we can't
reputation track them right because it's
impossible to do iteration because
attention inherently looks at a
shorttime horizon and goes o that feels
good and with iteration individuals who
are actually interested in in learning
in playing part in this in this
ecosystem that you're creating but don't
know how to get out of their own way
they need iterative feedback that is
reward and if if individuals are kind of
trying to do the right thing but they're
Anonymous in this space there's no way
to get the iterative feedback uh that
will enable them to seek the longterm
the long time Horizon right right oh I I
hadn't thought about it so much as a
decrement on the reinforcement side I I
although you know I can see exactly what
you mean by that because they they don't
acrew the reputational gains as a
consequence of their anonymity that
would come to a fair player in a normal
situation but they also don't ACR the
punishments right because you can't
reputation track them and and and you
know that that that actually brings up
another issue that might be
pathologizing our social communication
networks which is that the the
algorithms don't know what time frame
over which to optimize attentional grip
so that the game remains playable and so
what seems to be happening at the moment
is that we have the worst of hedonic
gratification allied with the worst of
Psychopathic enabling and those two
things go together and so if the
algorithms are
maximizing what would you say grip of
attentional spans of 15 to 30 seconds
let's say all they're going to do is
reward they're going to
reward they're going to reward
short-term manipulation of attention in
a manner that doesn't iterate well
across time it's kind of like
corporations focusing obsessively on
quarterly reports when they should be
devoting at least some of the resources
to thinking about whether or not they're
going to be around in 10 years now the
problem is as you guys know that the
farther out in time you attempt to plan
for the more likely your plans are to go
astray because you're the error of your
predictions increases as you move out
into time but um that's so I mean these
go go ahead Brett that's not the only
issue and so uh this is an interesting
discussion because it really um in some
sense Treads through some reasonably
well understood evolutionary ground and
into a landscape that is not politically
understood to be analogous but should be
um many years ago uh when game B was uh
an active group of people meeting to
discuss how to create uh good governance
I focused on the question of how to
prevent the evolution of corruption and
I had a hard time persuading people that
that was actually job number one their
sense was well we don't even have a
system that could be corrupted yet so
let's deal with that later and the the
key Insight is if you focus on it later
you'll lose yeah right what you have to
do is create a landscape of incen Ives
that is ruinous for those who attempt to
corrupt it and the reason that that is
the key element is that if you don't do
that what will happen is you will create
an evolutionary arms race in which those
who are wishing to corrupt your system
for whatever reason are seeking those
quadrants where you can't detect them
and even if you detect them in nine out
of 10 quadrants they'll find the one
that you don't and that's where they
will evolved into the next phase of the
the game if you want to prevent that
from happening what you have to do is
zero out their account so early that
there's no evolutionary feedback that
makes them better at gaming the system
over time and so what you're talking
about in the online environment is there
are really two elements to it one can
you create a cost so that there's not
effectively an infinite ability to throw
disposable Accounts at a problem in
order to find the loophole exactly
exactly yeah free that's that's free
evolutionary experimentation a with no
cost of illness pain or death well why
the hell wouldn't that proliferate like
mad of course it would and wait till the
AI systems get a handle on it right then
we really lose control of it oh man
that's for sure so what we need and I I
actually would predict that what we will
see across civilization as AI enables
aoral actors at a new level is we will
see
the prioritization of things that cannot
be faked with the augmentation by AI in
other words there will be a
prioritization of uh music in which it
is not a um a repeat of something on the
album but it is something generated in
real time and therefore that did not
involve the Consulting of AI we will see
you know interactive comedy rather than
uh somebody doing a 5 minute bit that
could have been augmented by AI but I
mean Live Events Live Events live events
are going to become pre even more
premium than they are because they'll be
the only things that people can see are
actually real I think that's already
happening actually yeah well go ahead go
ahead hether sorry but this is I mean
this is already the landscape in which
we know that Education Works best right
low polish uh not reproducible exactly
like you can you can go in with a
curriculum to a class
in one year and the next year the what
you think is exactly the same curriculum
but if you're doing your job as an
educator and the students are of course
different it's not going to be the same
course and you know this is this is the
mistake of textbooks right you know
textbooks are a useful tool but they are
incredibly Limited in terms of what they
can actually offer a student who is
looking to understand their Dynamic
long-term place in the world
so we could start by talking
about
[Music]
depression depressed people are sad and
frustrated and disappointed they tend to
feel all negative emotions
simultaneously in a manner that's
paralyzing depression is fundamentally a
biochemical disorder one of the things I
tried to determine as a good behaviorist
was whether the person who was suffering
was suffering because they were ill in
the strictly physiological sense or
whether they were suffering from the
cumulative micro and macro catastrophes
of
Life the probability that tossing an
anti-depressant into the mix is all of a
sudden going to fix life that are
absolutely catastrophically out of order
is zero the more unstable your life is
the less serotonin your brain produces
and that makes you hyper sensitive to
negative emotion and suppresses positive
emotion you take the problem I'm
suffering and then you think well why
are you suffering it's exposure therapy
and then you can practice encountering
the obstacles that are stopping you and
it'll make you braver and it'll help you
deal with your problems
voluntary confrontation with the forces
of darkness and chaos is the fundamental
story of
[Music]
life well so one of the things we're
wrestling with at Peterson Academy
obviously is like I see no
reason I don't see much distinction and
maybe I'm wrong about this but I don't
see much distinction between lecturing
to a thousand people and lecturing to
say 100,000 people like once you get
past the expanse where you're where it's
semi Minar like somewhere past that it
becomes they become roughly equivalent
now the problem with recorded lectures
like the ones that you guys offered is
that they take away the dynamism of the
interaction between the professors and
the students in the moment right and
that's some of that transformation that
you described the benefit of course I
think is that because we can cure curate
that while there's reach and cost those
are major benefits right but there's
also the case that we can very carefully
curate the lecturers so we can make sure
that they're of the highest possible
quality now what we want to do in
addition to that is we want to set up a
social landscape like what one of the
things we'd like to see at Peterson
Academy is that the students once
there's enough student enrollment
assuming that happens that people do
think set up uh what would you say
social locasion like watch parties you
know where 20 or 30 people could get
together and watch a lecture when it
when it first emerges and we're trying
to also figure out how to incorporate
you could imagine a 3-day convention for
example where we bring you know a
several thousand people together or more
than that with a dozen professors and
run it for three days and we want to
flesh out the social element and that's
partly why we concentrated a lot on the
development of the social media Network
too so because
obviously what you get at University is
the provision of information in books
and and and textbooks and lectures but
there's a peer component and an
mentorship component that's more
difficult to duplicate online but I
don't think it's impossible especially
because the universities have dropped
the ball in that regard they're not very
good at actually facilitating the social
element at in higher education they're
not good at fostering the development of
productive peer networks they sort of
let that happen by happen stance so I
think we can do a better job and so
we're very very cognizant of that
particular problem and you know it's a
major focus of address as we move
forward but um we've got all sorts of
things planned for in-person events and
given that the cost of our what we hope
will develop into a full high level
University equivalent education the cost
is so low we should be able to offer
people relatively special experiences to
go along with it that will fill that
that'll fill that vacuum so yeah so
Brett the part of the solution to the
problem that you raised with regards to
the proliferation of evolutionary actors
let's say in the pathological space is
cost of Entry right this is it could be
that free social media networks are
doomed from the outset and I think
there's got to be something to that and
tell me what you think about that well I
do think there are ways to structure it
that can solve the problem without cost
being the key element cost cost is
useful but of course you don't really
want to
enable anything that has effectively
indefinitely Deep Pockets to be able to
get around your barrier to entry in
other words if you're talking about uh
let's say political Dialogue on social
networks of
consequence if there are trillions of
dollars at stake in a given election
then somebody might be able to spend the
millions or tens of millions to game
your net work even though it doesn't
make sense from a profitability
perspective for them to do it so you
want yeah right you want to have a
system that negates this and one way to
do that is to
use uh to basically create a stigma for
inauthentic
behavior for parting things cutting and
pasting things Consulting AI in some way
that is uh that causes your comment to
be derivative
and so Reddit is now completely gamed
there's no question about it but it did
have a couple of elements that worked
really well allowing users to
essentially
downregulate that which was not useful
and upregulate that which was insightful
is it's something that could be
resurrected I think it was if you can
figure out if you can figure out how to
stop the down regulation from being
gamed by collectives of activists for
example right yeah yeah well at the
moment you know what we've done so far
and we're going to make this as
transparent as possible as we move
forward hey with three with 30,000
students we've had three Bad actors
that's all and our our policy at the
moment is we're watching you know we're
watching the social media interactions
constantly to see what's going on our
policy at the moment is that if you're
not playing Fair we just give you your
money back now that's not good enough
like I think there should be a system
where it's three strikes and then
there's actually something like an
independent jury and then there's an
appeal process right and that all has to
be 100% transparent because otherwise
the the regulation process becomes
sensorial and and and will degenerate
across time even if you start with even
if you start with the best of all
possible motivations but I but I also
think too that
having established the ground rules
implicitly already and the fact that
everybody's playing fair at the
beginning we're also setting the
parameters of expected behavior on the
site you know and one of the things
we're kind of hoping for in the long run
is that we can you can imagine a
net of
communications that was
composed of the of everything that was
of the highest quality I mean part of
the problem with the free-for-all that's
the internet right now is that it's the
there's no hierarchy of curation and so
there's it's it's an infinite library in
some ways but almost all of its not
almost all of it a large proportion of
it is pointless junk and a fair bit of
it is pathological Beyond Comprehension
and so obviously something needs to be
done about that across time and it seems
to me that one good approach is to build
something parallel that emphasizes
quality so well I have a couple
suggestions for you in this regard one
um I often have trouble compelling
people of this point also but the key or
one of them to making such a thing
function if it is a private space
is very clear simple rules at the door
that allow for effectively complete
discretion in the enforcing of Common
Sense measures in other words with you
want is to say look by signing up for
this you are agreeing to act in good
faith here is what that means you're
allowed to play Devil's Advocate but
you're not allowed to misrepresent your
position or the reasons for it how will
we adjudicate questions well we will try
to adjudicate them uh out in the open
but if there are cases which there will
be where we can't we will do it by a
jury it will be chosen by this
mechanism um should we find problems
with the jury mechanism we have a
council of people we believe are uh of
excellent character who will be the
final Arbiters something like that so
that the at the point somebody says
you're censoring me the answer is
actually here are the rules that you
signed up for and this is not an enduser
license agreement that was designed for
you to glaze over and click yes this was
actually designed for you to read it to
understand it and for it to change your
approach to the system itself that was
designed to uh to impress you and invite
you and cause you to be deliberate Larry
AR Larry AR does that at Hillsdale when
all the undergraduates show up and and
it isn't some pro-or of thing because
Aron is very involved with the
undergraduates themselves directly he's
the president of the university and so
he makes this a personal what priority
and they they have an honor code and
part of the honor code is that there is
a code of behavior at Hillsdale and it
isn't the same as say State universities
and there's a State University just down
the street so to speak and you're more
than welcome to go there but if you're
going to go to Hillsdale then this is
the code you're going to abide by they
have a 1% dropout rate in their first
year wow right absolutely wow and so
we're going to build we're going to
write an honor code for for Peterson
Academy and it's going to be short and
we're going to hope that people read it
and pay attention to it carefully that's
a great idea yeah yeah we go ahead
hither we actually we did this within
Evergreen so Evergreen obviously was a
deeply flawed institution um but it it
had remarkable pieces within which we
were able to do some remarkable things
and one of the things that was required
of professors in programs these
full-time programs that that faculty
taught and that students took uh was we
had documents that were um strangely
there was a lot of religious overtone in
the language there called covenants and
every the faculty in any given program
wrote an original supposed to be
Covenant for that program that all the
students read and signed on to and
agreed to and it was you know very much
you know within a program at Evergreen
it was very much like what you're
describing as um Hillsdale at large So
within a program we could say you know
here are the rules of engagement here is
effectively my my promises to you as
faculty to students and what you are
promising to each other and to me in
return and there are plenty of other
choices to go to within the Evergreen
you know ecosystem if this doesn't suit
you you know you can you can go any
number of other places and while you
know Evergreen WR large say you know in
this case the analogy being like the
higher ed Universe the higher ed system
at large was deeply flawed and had you
know a lot of people uh leaving very
quickly our programs didn't right this
you know this this worked
extraordinarily effectively and um you
know I don't know I'm I'm pleased to
hear um that it's working at Hillsdale
I'm excited to hear that you're trying
to do it that you're going to be working
on it at P Academy I don't know I my my
question is always one of scale like to
to what degree of do the interpersonal
when I when I can look you in the eye
you when I can look when we were
teaching together I can look our 50
students in the eye and know something
true about each of them within the first
week Beyond their name like something
about each one of them then we have a
relationship such that the the first
time I have to say to you what were you
doing or no I think you're wrong they
don't mistake me for some you know Rando
Authority Aran who is just looking to
get to the end of the the quarter and to
get my paycheck they know that I have
something real about them uh in my you
know in my head and my heart so that's
that's the thing that's not replicable
at scale um but but maybe there are ways
around
that in today's chaotic World many of us
are searching for a way to aim higher
and find spiritual peace but here's the
thing prayer the most common tool we
have isn't just about saying whatever
comes to mind it's a skill that needs to
be developed that's where hallow comes
in as the number one prayer and
meditation app hallow is launching an
exceptional new series called how to
pray imagine learning how to use
scripture as a Launchpad for profound
conversations with God how to properly
enter into imaginative prayer and how to
incorporate prayers reaching far back in
church history this isn't your average
guided meditation it's a comprehensive
two-e Journey Into the Heart of prayer
led by some of the most respected
spiritual leaders of our time from
guests including B Bishop Robert Baron
father Mike schmidtz and Jonathan roomy
known for his role as Jesus in the hit
series The Chosen you'll discover prayer
techniques that have stood the test of
time while equipping yourself with the
tools needed to face life's challenges
with renewed strength ready to
revolutionize your prayer life you can
check out the new series as well as an
extensive catalog of guided prayers when
you download the Hallow app just go to
hall.com Jordan and download the Hallow
app today for an exclusive 3-month trial
that's hall.com
Jordan elevate your prayer life
today well I we're going to find that
out I mean so so one of the things we
might distinguish conceptually is the
difference between censorship and
refereeing right I mean nobody thinks of
of a referee in a hockey game as a
censor and so but he does forbid things
okay so then what's the difference well
I think we outlined a lot of the
difference is like what we're what we're
doing is best say in an educ in an
iterable educational environment is best
construed as a sophisticated game there
has to be rules for the game they have
to be rules that make sense they have to
be the rules that make the game playable
in a manner that makes people want to
play it voluntarily right so that's one
of the that's one of the Hallmarks of uh
valid rule set is people who abide by it
voluntarily then the rules have to be
known and then there has to be a
mechanism that's clear and transparent
for enforcing the rules that's not
censorship right because everybody it's
no more censorship than the referees
role in a game and I do think that
that's the right analogy I I have two
more suggestions for you in this regard
one is it will be the lesson of
civilization in fact is that it is
effectively impossible to write that set
of rules and anticipate the way in which
it will be gamed especially if you have
en enabled actors that evolve in
response the way to succeed is to
leverage that same evolutionary force in
the immunity of your system so if you
the simplest case would be that you
deploy two related rule sets with a
difference that you don't know whether
it will play positively or negatively
and you monitor the outcome and then you
basically uh you spawn the one that
functioned better and then an even more
out there
idea is that you allow you divide you
know you could divide it into more than
two but let's say you divided your
population of um of participants into an
a group and a b group and you let the a
group govern B's landscape and the B
group govern A's landscape and you let
the people within each of the Landscapes
dictate whether or not the rules are
working I cut you choose right it's I
cut you choose and okay I'll think about
that I'll think about that what do you
think of musk's solution with Community
notes because what he's really doing
with that you could say is bringing the
possibility of distributed cognition to
the problem of Bad actors and that it's
it's analogous as far as I can see to a
to the free market solution of of
pricing it's something like that and so
is that well what do you think what do
you think about that solution it's more
difficult to game although Wikipedia had
that and it's been gamed eventually
right that that's the thing you need to
enable A system that is capable of
adapting faster than those who are
trying to game it and that's the
parasite problem right so musk solution
actually did work at first and
increasingly doesn't and the problem is
that it is too static and therefore G
right right right but it also it also
defaults to what uh the majority believe
yeah yeah right so you know the the the
rare new insight will get disappeared by
such a such an approach right right and
that's a big problem and that's actually
the problem of populism right now
exactly is that so you know I've been
investigating the manner in which
traditional religious structures solve
that problem and what they do is they
they have two axes of verification you
could say and one is appeal to the
population that's now say but that has
to be allied with a vertical orientation
which is something like continual
reference to the traditions of the past
that made iterable games possible it's
lineage so it's lineage lineage lineage
lineage and the texts that the that your
ancestors wrote well it's half of
lineage that's the problem ah it doesn't
it doesn't look forward so in our last
discussion uh Jordan we talked about uh
my version of the Sacred versus the
shamanistic and I know you have a a
related but different version of it
but the Orthodoxy that comes from the
past has the virtue of having stood the
test of time right which is a not to be
undervalued that is a tremendously
powerful indicator of validity of one
kind or
another but the other thing is
predictive power and what we do not want
to do and Heather was just alluding to
this is you do not want to set up any
system that says that because a
perspective is vanishingly rare it is
wrong wrong yeah right because sometimes
that's wrong in fact every great idea
starts that way last thing you want to
do is is frustrate the process that
generates valid new ideas that change
that's like eradicating beneficial
mutations right exactly so what you want
to do probably at the same ratio too
honestly right right you need you need
three axes where you were describing too
right there's how it plays in the
present there's how it references to
what we understand from the past and how
well does it predict things in the
future and we want to be specifically
aware that something that successfully
predicts things in the future that
nothing else predicts is likely to have
a kind of validity whether we understand
what it's based on or not yep yep yep
yep all right all right let's turn our
attention away from that problem for a
moment to what you guys are doing on the
political landscape right at the moment
and so you have a you have a rally
planned in Washington on September 29th
and so would you walk us through well
what let let's start with Who's involved
and exactly what this is and what's what
its aims are and just tell the whole
story sure and I will say I struggle
with the terminology this to me is post
political
non
ideological yes it's technically an
event but it's an event or we are hoping
it is an event in the same way that
Woodstock was a music festival we are
hoping actually that this is a moment uh
at which we first see a SE change in the
way we conduct ourselves and interact
with each
other I think of it actually as
hopefully the book end that closes the
era that opened with Woodstock and opens
the next era in which we recognize just
how much we have in common just how much
we have to lose if our system fails
which it seems to be doing in front of
our
eyes the rally the event uh is called
rescue the
Republic um the idea was originally
framed as save or defend the West we
recognize the uh the crisis is so so
charged within the US that we decided to
focus on the Republic save the rescue
the Republic first in order to save the
West um and well you asked who is
involved um I'm going to undoubtedly
forget important people who uh have uh
agreed to come speak on our behalf well
where can people find the full list ah
they can find all the information at
join the resistance .org join the
resistance.org and they can follow us on
Twitter at rescu
Republic okay so if you do Miss anyone
that's where people can go for the
additional information and we'll post
that in the description of the video as
well yes okay so fire away with regards
to participants okay and I I will also
say that um there are people who are in
the process of uh agreeing to come who
aren't listed yet so stay tuned even
even somebody who's not listed today
maybe tomorrow tomorrow uh so we have
Bobby Kennedy coming to speak we have
tulsey gabard we have uh Laura Logan
Heather and I will be speaking we have
Russell Brand we have Matt
taibi uh we have uh Jimmy
door um Rob Schneider Rob Schneider uh
we
have several musicians yeah we have
Skillet coming we have five times August
who uh was a tremendous voice during the
covid
madness um we have Tennessee jet coming
uh
deac boy are they going to play any of
these people going to play as well as
talk to you yeah we have uh speakers we
have speakers we have Comedians and we
have musicians great great great that's
that's a good approach that that
multimodal approach it and and that does
make it different than this standard
let's say political rally right and I I
think partly what that does we did that
a bit at this Arc Alliance for
responsible citizenship meeting in
London you know I I was very insistent
on the musical and artistic element and
I think it's because the
propositional has to be surrounded by
the imagistic and aesthetic that's more
like the domain of dream right it's like
the way that I look at cognitive
cognitive architecture is that there's a
propositional landscape which we've
actually modeled pretty well now I would
say with large language models but
outside of that there's an imagistic
aesthetic and dreamlike Landscape that's
the landscape of the imagination and
outside of that is the embodied
procedural realm right and a full event
covers all three of those domains you
can't you can't assume that the
propositional alone is going to carry it
and I think it's partly because the
propositional is easier in some ways it
has flaws and it's easier to it's easier
to DeMent it and and capture it than it
is to capture the imagination and and
the procedural landscape anyways if you
flesh it out with those additional
sources it's also a much richer
experience for the people that are
involved so that's it's more it's more
engaging it's more fun and that's not
trivial if the fun isn't you know that
short-term hedonic immediate
gratification that we were describing
earlier if it's allied with something
like upward striving it's much more
profound and and impact
occurrence and integrated and more human
and more holistic because what you're
calling the
propositional uh I might call uh you
know features of the Enlightenment of
the rational of the logic of The Logical
of the analytical uh whereas uh we have
sort of lateral to that but no less
important narrative and art and
creativity and uh by sort of moving
between these two spaces we have the
opportunity for discovery that we may
not have an either place yeah and also
the what you're calling the
propositional what I think of is sort of
the you know the fruits of the
Enlightenment um are are easily made
into reductionist tenants uh that then
become metrics that are quantifiable and
numbers are necessary and important for
us to understand our world but they are
not sufficient and they can be made to
seem sufficient and that's one of the
lessons I think of Co um and frankly to
some degree of this political moment
we're living in too that uh you throw
enough uh these are the numbers don't
worry about it I'm the expert just trust
me at people and many of them kind of go
okay yeah I'm just I'm just not educated
enough to understand that you've got the
numbers you're the expert we'll go with
that when we think about wildly
successful businesses we often focus on
their great products cool branding and
Brilliant marketing but there's an
unsung hero in their success stories the
business behind the business that makes
selling simple for millions of
entrepreneurs that business is Shopify
Shopify is home to the number one
checkout on the planet and here's the
not so secret secret with shop pay they
boost conversions up to 50% that means
fewer abandoned carts and more completed
sales our marketing team uses Shopify
every day to sell our merchandise and we
love how easy it is to add more items
ship products and track conversions in
today's market growth-minded businesses
need a Commerce Solution that's just as
flexible and dynamic as they are whether
your customers are browsing your website
scrolling through social media or
wandering into your store Shopify
ensures you're ready to sell ready to
elevate your business upgrade your
business today and get the same checkout
daily wire uses sign up for your $1 per
month trial period at shopify.com jbp
all lowercase go to shopify.com jbp
today to upgrade your selling that's
shopify.com
jbp well it's also possibly the case
that that also accounts for maybe why
democratic tradition or the Republican
tradition works you know is because
intellectuals are propositional experts
but that doesn't make them wise and
wisdom I suspect has something to do
with the alignment between the
propositional and the imagistic and the
procedural so it's an embodied it's an
embodied uh quality and it's a quality
of the imagination there's there's no
shortage of people who aren't educated
and who aren't very articulate who can
still tell the difference between right
and wrong and they can do it prettyy
uniring I mean dogs can do that to some
degree right I mean they they're not so
bad at sniffing out pathological
character but they can't
propositionalization in in the
propositional space to assume that
they're
Superior in terms of their grip on on
knowledge even outside their specialized
domains but that they're also wiser and
more moral and there's no correlation
between cognitive ability and
conscientiousness zero there's no
correlation between intelligence in
intelligence looks like it's orthogonal
to all the personality traits and so
it's a funny thing a that there's no
relationship between General cognitive
ability and wisdom or morality so if
you're really smart you can go bad very
badly very very badly well I wonder I
wonder if that's going to hold up
actually there are reasons to imagine
that you might start seeing a
correlation
between intelligence the fly and the
ointment being how good are you at
actually measuring that we have proxies
for measuring Your Capacity to succeed
but to succeed in an aoral system maybe
it's not such a good proxy for
intelligence but um back to the earlier
point
I want to point to something that Tom
stoppard said about uh about
humor he said laughter is the sound of
comprehension and right that's good my
point would
be that the comedians this will become
less and less true the more they
leverage AI to figure out what people
will laugh at it will become a
self-referential land of nons sense but
for the moment while AI is decidedly not
funny and it's really terrible at being
funny so far um the
comedian is
traversing a an edge between what we are
conscious of and what we are barely
conscious of and when the comedian
delivers a joke that causes the room to
erupt and laughter the comedian has
found something that everybody in the
room is aware of but they are not aware
that everybody else is aware of it and
so the room comes to understand itself
as of like mind all at once right that's
an extremely powerful very ancient
property often of like mind about
something forbidden I think of that as
that's often the translation of the
procedural or imagistic into the
explicit because that's the comedian
gives words they gives words to
Something in coate it's like it's it's
already it's it's captured in the Rel
relationship between the ideas that
already exists right and then the
comedian puts his finger on it just like
someone who coins a word does you know
all of a sudden words pop up and we need
them and they spread like mad because
they've specified something that was a
gap in our propositionalization and
everyone recognizes it it's implicit
yeah and and it's funny too a because
and this is a strange thing is that it
isn't obvious at all that that SP that
capacity for spontaneous laughter can be
gamed you know I mean you can get are
there cruel forms of laughter there are
but but it's such an unconscious
response right it's pre it's you laugh
despite yourself often yeah you
certainly laugh before you think about
whether you should laugh so there's
something if you think about whether you
should laugh then you will commit a
humor sin which is laughing at the wrong
moment it's interesting that there's a
cost to laughing when the punch line
hasn't been delivered or after you know
everybody else is laughing and it's like
you're trying to cover the fact that
you're really not you're not one of
us hey there truth Seekers and
freethinkers are you tired of the same
old merch that doesn't quite capture
your intellectual Spirit Well buckle up
because we've got some exciting news
that will make your synapsis fire
introducing the official dailywire merch
store on Sticker Mule Sticker Mule isn't
just any old merch company they are the
internet's favorite place for custom
stickers magnets and More in response to
the Trump assassination attempt sticker
mu's co-founder and CEO vocalized his
support for the former president and
called for an end to political hate now
they're bringing you exclusive daily
wire gear that will make your liberal
arts Professor do a double take by
shopping at stickermule.com dailywire
you're not just getting awesome merch
you're supporting free speech and
standing up against leftist group thing
plus a portion of every sale goes
directly to support the daily wire so
what are you waiting for head over to
stickermule.com dailywire today that's
stickermule.com
dailywire yeah that inappropriate
laughter has been has been pointed out
as like that's one of the things that
comes up as a critique of camela Harris
consistently right is for better for
worse she's T um with the brush of
inappropriate laughter and you're you're
pointing out that that's the gaming of
something that's an evolutionarily
designed marker of of something like
cognitive integrity
laughter itself has been gained and I
would say that actually one of the most
troubling inventions that human beings
have devised this is going to sound
Preposterous but one of the most laugh
track yeah no kidding e the and the idea
that you can be induced to believe that
something was humorous that you did not
find humorous on your own actually
starts leading the population in the
direction of believing things very
deeply that they would never have
accepted in the first place so it may be
used just to sell you know deodorant and
cereal on some trivial sitcom but the
capacity to induce humans to come to
conclusions they wouldn't otherwise
reach by making it sound as if they were
in a room full of people laughing in
agreement that's a very troubling thing
right right right Heather to go back to
your your quote from stoer the brilliant
Tom stord laughter is the sound of
comprehension is that it um I
think I agree um but I think in your
telling of the story of what happens as
comedians talk um actually um conflates
to things both of which are important
and we've been talking about the
individual coming to Consciousness The
Comedian says something in the
individual brain they go oh I didn't
know that was subconscious until now and
now it's explicit now it's conscious I
didn't know um but there silly me silly
me or oh God they can he can see that or
you know whatever it is um but then
there's also the population level and
you you alluded to this and what you
said but I think it's no less important
than maybe exactly what you know a rally
for instance is meant to do and exactly
what we need right now and you know I'm
sure you experienced this Jordan we
certainly experienced this where um
people will come up to us and say you
know thank you for saying the things
that you say I don't feel alone I you
know I don't I I I didn't know or that I
couldn't say I couldn't say I I didn't I
I I had come to understand this but I
thought I was the only one in the
universe yeah and so you know taking it
back to um comedy uh in a a group of
anonymous people a large group of
anonymous people if everyone laughs at
the same moment not only did that maybe
bring yourself to consciousness of that
thing at that moment or maybe you
already knew it but if everyone laughs
you know I I am not alone
I I am in sync we are synchronized we
are seeing the same things the lens
through even with regard to the
Unspeakable even with regard to the
Unspeakable and so right away that gives
you a momentum and an opportunity for
Action that maybe you did not know was
possible before uh so I think that's an
addition additional the individual and
the population are not the same oh
absolutely and um I think comedy
potentially activates both yeah it's the
power it's the power of the room or the
population that comes to understand
itself as aligned and I would point out
it's a little harder to describe this
with respect to music and I would say
music has
been radically distorted by technology
beginning at the play or piano but the
ability to listen to music and have it
be the same no matter how many times you
play it is a very unnatural way for
music to exist music used to be a living
entity even uh you know a tribe that was
singing the same song that had been sung
a thousand times it was different every
single time and it was therefore capable
of adapting to the changing mood of the
people who were who were participating
in it um so what we moderns who are
drenched in music all the time we don't
even notice it sometimes it's
soundtracking some story we're watching
and we're not thinking about the fact
that there's music but what we miss
being so thoroughly surrounded by music
is the incredibly powerful and rarified
experience when the band or whatever it
is the musician or the band is actually
in some Indescribable
way tied into the audience and the room
is electric and every is synced and
everybody is feeling a powerful emotion
and it they know they are feeling it
together right they are being stimulated
by the same thing and they are feeling
the same way and even if you record that
thing and you play it for somebody and
you say look at how great this was they
don't get the same feeling of discovery
that that room had and it's it's like
the comedy and it's it's important and
it's part of why rescue the Republic is
structured around you know yes the
propositional it has to be there we have
to articulate what it is that we fear
and what it is that we hope um but
comedy and music are much deeper
mechanisms of conveying the sense of
unity which is really what this is about
it's not a political rally this is about
the unity movement discovering that
actually we value Western Civilization
we fear that it is coming apart and we
are going to put our differences aside
in order to participate in protecting it
from what threatens it and putting it
back on the course that was that we were
set upon by the founding
fathers I have a friend uh Greg herwitz
who started this messaging organization
called us colon the story or us colon
the story either way and he's been doing
a lot of sophisticated polling and he's
identified a very large number of
statements where there is above 85%
agreement among Americans you know and
this is actually tied into this
Psychopathic manipulation story that we
started with because you could imagine
that tell me what you think of this
hypothesis is that we've got 3 to 5%
Psychopathic actors in any given
population okay now the question is how
do they manip how do they maneuver and
the answer is well they use language in
a purely instrumental manner so they're
only after their own advancement um and
even in a non-ind durable way they're
only after their own advancement so
they'll use whatever words are around to
gain that end so that you now you can
imagine that the most contentious
elements of the political discourse then
are going to be hijacked by the
psychopaths psychopaths on the left
they're going to game they generally
game compassion as far as I'm can tell
and the Psychopaths on the right they
gain group game group identity at the
moment they're probably gaming free
speech and they put themselves forward
as avatars of these moral virtues but
it's it's completely illusory because
they're just manipulating and then what
they make it they make it appear that
the political divide is much greater and
much more intense than it is and that
that tends to polarize and so you know
we know that things started to come
unglued around 2014 2015 something like
that seems to be the real onset of this
this malaise that grips us at the
present time I don't think it's chance
at all that that was about the same time
when these Mass scale Social Media
communication networks emerged and
allowed the Psychopaths free reign so I
mean Greg's polling data is quite Market
because even on the most contentious
issues for example abortion there's
widespread American agreement on the
essential parameters of the laws and so
okay now I want to ask a more personal
question you and I the three of us we've
been going back and forth to some degree
of about this event in Washington and um
since talking to you especially on the X
live the space we could also discuss the
spaces yeah the spaces um you know that
reignited my interest in attending and
so I want to know two things I want to
know what will your people the speakers
be doing and what is it you think that
if I showed up what do you think I could
add to the discussion
specifically um the second question is
both easier and harder to answer you
will bring what you bring and it will be
powerful and uh will catalyze the event
in ways that nobody else can do it so um
rather than tell you what you should
bring I'm much more interested to figure
out what you think you should bring but
as with respect to the former we are
going to
articulate
the um effectively the eight pillars
which we believe are things that all
patriotic Americans would easily agree
to these are things that uh are
jeopardized by what we call industrial
complexes and uh by Framing the
argument you know there's a practical
what will happen on the day of the event
and then there's a a much larger picture
about what it what it stands for most
people will not be able to make it to DC
um but having this picture articulated
and
watching Americans recognize exactly
what you've just described right and
Greg her's effort is excellent but I
would point out we also have an earlier
version of this the hidden tribes report
from somewhere 20 2018 I think suggested
that there was a vast what they called
exhausted middle of people who agreed on
almost every important thing that is
being drowned out by these fringes that
have polarized us even over things that
we are not in disagreement
about so oh go ahead well so Brett's
been one of the prime one of the three
prime organizers of this and I am I I
have been invited so I don't know nearly
as much about about the event but um is
it okay to describe what you mean by the
industrial complexes because as I
understand it are those are those the
mythological Giants that's what it looks
to me well I will say we we have been I
won't even say wrestling because I'm not
sure there's even any disagreement about
it but even for somebody like me who is
fundamentally secular in my
understanding of the universe it is
pretty clear that there is something
that is reasonably described as a
spiritual Dimension to the battle that
we are engaged in not only does the
opposition appear to be playing with
demonic tropes for reasons I can
scarcely imagine but there is a
recognition of this being a a historical
moment in the making one way or the
other and that
um something well beyond our well-being
as a modern people is at stake our
ability to continue is at stake and
so I don't know how well that answers
question what do you what do you make of
the fact that as a secular thinker the
this is the corner that you found
yourself pushed into see see I noticed
something in my clinical practice over
the years that as the pathology that my
client was embroiled in increased in
intensity
and severity the language necessary to
encapsulate what was occurring became
increasingly
religious and you you could think about
that I think you can think about that
technically to some degree is that there
there are levels of hell as Dante
pointed out and maybe there's something
that unites all forms of misery at the
bottom all forms of unnecessary misery
let's say at the bottom and then you can
be suffering from manifestations of that
Psychopathology at different degrees but
then you could imagine that there's an
evolved language for dealing with those
different levels of
severity upward as well as downward and
that they we recognize the language that
properly deals with the most severe
situations as religious there's no
difference in my estimation there's no
difference in the true sense between
what's religious and what's deep now
that's leaves the mystery of deep but it
moves us further in our understanding
let's put it this way I'm pretty sure I
can explain why there appears to be a
spiritual Dimension to the battle that
we are in in perfectly dry secular
materialist terms without difficulty in
fact I don't think it needs to be done
though you know at some level we can say
that those religious terms are
responsive to the
critical battles and turning points in
history and they have encoded something
very deep about how the population that
got through those predicaments
understood itself and that we should
probably be tapping into those uh those
toolkits which frankly can go you know
hundreds of years without being needed
and so they are not the stuff that is
familiar we have to reach into something
that goes beyond the regular toolkit I
can say that in secular terms but I
guess my point would be I actually find
no need to do it at the moment the point
is actually you know the last thing you
want in if if you were on a
battlefield and you were fighting a
battle for your survival that is not the
time for somebody to be talking about
you know the conservation of energy and
the kinetics and blah blah blah the
point is that's the time to figure out
how to defeat your enemy in the most
practical terms that you can there are
other times to describe you know the
trajectory of the missiles and the way
the aerodynamics might be optimized I
think if I if I may I feel like you're
conflating uh secular with uh
reductionist rationality no because I
think we need narrative for sure but uh
if I may try to Ste Steel Man the
position that maybe we shouldn't
entirely go into the religious and
spiritual narratives here in trying to
you know reunify the Republic it's that
many of the people who can't
see who are seeing pieces of it but are
still sort of blinkered by um you know
the especially the political party to
which they have always belonged and
cannot imagine going anywhere else um
proudly understand themselves to be not
religious and you know you know the we
aren't religious we are secular we are
evolutionary biologists with a deep
respect for religion and that doesn't
seem to offend uh most secular people
but if all of our stories are inherently
spiritual seeming or religious seeming
that will make it easier to dismiss us I
think we've been wrestling with exactly
that issue with Ark so we have a I have
a proposition for you that's analogous I
would say to the idea of minimal
necessary for course I think that can be
propagated into other domains of
conceptualization effectively minimal
necessary emotion in political
discussions that's helpful but then I
would also say like the gospel
injunction to Render unto Caesar and and
differentially Render unto God is also
appropriate because my rule of thumb is
not to use religious language to
explicate anything that can be explained
without it like it should be reserved
for those situations where there isn't
any other language that appears to
suffice like for me for example the
horrors of the oswit campu Guard who
enjoyed his occupation was best
described in the language of Good and
Evil there wasn't anything else that
seemed to suffice now there are there
are lesser sins you might say that that
you can speak about in a much more
secular and maybe a causal in
reductionistic way but but there are
there are situations where only the
religious language should be utilized
and I would say also perhaps reserved
for those circumstances because
otherwise it gets cheapened and that's
perhaps precisely why you don't cast
Pearls Before Swine let's say right you
save the heavy guns for when they're
necessary so and there's another issue
that we're skirting around here to some
degree which is also exceedingly complex
right because Heather you made reference
to the necessity of narrative you see I
think one of the things the
postmodernists got right like
fundamentally and profoundly right and
and this is partly why we have this
culture War raging is because as
Despicable as they are in many regards
as nihilistic and as Marxist as they are
in many regards the postmodernists put
forward the proposition that are
fundamental frames of perceptual
reference were narrative in structure
and so we seem to have this situation
where we have a
narrative mode of apprehen hension and a
scientific mode of apprehension but that
the narrative mode is more fundamental I
think the scientific is nested inside
the narrative and I don't think that
that can be I don't think that there's
any way of altering that now I think the
postmodernists went wrong here like they
got the problem right we live in a
narrative I I think actually that a
narrative is a description of the
structure that we use to organize our
perceptions so so that means even the
perceptions that us as the scientist are
prefigured in by this underlying
narrative there are narratives that work
well with the scientific Endeavor like
the idea the a prior narrative idea that
the universe is pervaded by a logos that
is
intelligible right that's a starting
point for the scientific Endeavor and
that investigating that logos is benefit
that's another narrative and when you
have those two you can you can begin the
scientific Enterprise but I think what
the postmodernists did wrong
was after having discovered that we saw
the world through a narrative they leap
to the essentially Marxist
presupposition that that narrative was
necessarily and inevitably one of power
that's right and I think that's
technically wrong I mean partly for the
reasons we talked about at the beginning
of this podcast is Psychopaths play the
power game and they've never been
successful enough to get about to get
above about 5% of the population like it
is a local Minima power but it's not an
optimized game and I think what we've
done in the west is we've actually
figured out a good way of Distributing
an optimized game that isn't based on
power even though it can be corrupted by
power in a way that everyone can play
and in a self- sustaining and
self-improving manner it doesn't mean
the power critique is irrelevant because
I think when those systems degenerate
one of the primary ways they degenerate
is in the direction of power and
compulsion we saw that during covid for
example we see that with these gigantic
monstrosity amalgams of state and
corporation that are tromping around the
world you know destroying people
underfoot those are the industrial
complexes yes exactly exactly oh and
with regards to the Tilt towards the
Demonic so imagine this I think I think
that's actually easily explainable so
you know the the large language models
have basically showed us that you can
map ideas in their
associations and so that's essentially
what they do is they calculate the
statistical regularity between words but
also between phrases and sentences and
paragraphs and it's incredibly
computationally complex but they're
pulling out the pattern of the logos
let's say but then you can think
associated with the that complex this is
what the psychoanalyst like Yung really
put their finger on and really
especially Yung there are IM there's
like a cloud of images and dramas that
are also statistically associated with
those webs of ideas and so then you
imagine if you allow a certain set of a
certain complex of ideas to inhabit you
if you invite that in what comes along
is a whole imaginative landscape that's
part and parcel of the domain of your
imagination that you don't fully
comprehend like that's the invitation of
something that's been classically
regarded as possession and it's the
right way of thinking about it you know
you're I think you're inevitably
possessed by the spirit that
characterizes your most fundamental aim
I don't think there's any way around
that and that's a that's a terrifying
thing to understand if you actually
understand it I've been thinking about
prayer in that regard you know so this
is a strange idea but let me elaborate
and tell me what you think about this so
what you do when you call in the large
language model is you call you put
forward a call to make a a a form of
knowledge that's implicit in the
statistical relationships between the
ideas
explicit okay but what you make
explicit in that manner is dependent on
your aim it's dependent on the question
you ask so you could say that with a
large language model they game them so
they're politically correct but
independently of that that the answer
you get will be dependent on the
question that you ask so then you could
say well the answer you get is dependent
on the spirit of the question that you
ask I think the same thing that happens
to happens to us in relationship to our
own unconscious is that the answer you
get the revelatory answer you get when
an idea emerges in the phenomenological
landscape you get an answer from the
spirit you call
upon by the spirit of your
question so think this this has a very
weird implication I'm very curious about
what you guys think about this and and
I'm not saying that this is definitive
but it means in a way that if you strove
strived
to GA gather information in the manner
that
was aiming at the highest possible good
right
truly then the revelations that you
receive from the conscious are going to
be in that spirit and what that means
this is such a weird thing I don't know
what to make of it it means that you
could call upon God and he would answer
even if he didn't exist and then I think
well this is weird because there's an
insistence in almost all
religious in deep religious
representations of the Divine is that
whatever the Divine is is neither real
nor non-real right it transcends those
categories and yeah and so well I I've
walked myself into that logical corner
and I can't see any way out of it it's a
very peculiar thing to contemplate you
know cuz you can imagine so and you know
that you do this when you're trying to
generate hypothesis as a scientist right
if you if you're if you're a real
scientist you sit and you think okay
what's my wish what's my prayer I hope
that I can evaluate this landscape of
data that be the perceptual landscape I
could hope I can negotiate it in the
spirit of Truth not being contaminated
by my ambition my my desire to raise
myself in the esteem of my colleagues um
to take revenge on people who criticized
my ideas in the past to show pridefully
that I'm intelligent I want to move all
those Spirits out of the inquiry
landscape and I want to generate a
hypothesis that's in the spirit of the
truth and I think the better you are at
clearing your head so to speak the more
likely you are to do that so anyways I
will leave that to you guys to so much
respond there let me just go to the last
Point first and then uh uh I I was
thinking exactly this that um many years
ago when people were claiming that what
we needed was more diversity in science
because that would solve the problems
that they saw in science you know more
diversity of you know sex and race and
such the answer that I quickly arrived
at was um that should not affect the
answers that we are getting but it would
affect the questions that are being
asked because scientists get to choose
the questions that they are asking
precisely in the way uh that you are
saying and the scientific process is the
best way we have inefficient and flawed
as it is to arrive at answers that no
matter who was asking the questions they
get to the same answers and so like how
how is it that we can
recognize what our interests are as much
as possible and say okay I'm gonna
whether or not you're asking God or you
know something else or trying to do
scientific inquiry I'm going to
recognize that this is me asking a
question and that I come with my own
biases and perceptual history and and
and senses and there's no getting around
that I can try to understand it as much
as possible but the question will at the
end of the day come from me or from you
or from you and then we can apply Tools
in you know Enlightenment tools if you
will um by which to answer the question
that I came up with uh in a way such
that you then or you or you or you could
ask the same question that I came up
with and get the same answer right but
the question itself changes based on who
is asking well so you're pointing to I
think something that's scandalous in
relationship to our analysis of the
scientific process within the scientific
domain now um Thomas popped out of
this a little bit and there's been other
people working on it but you know when I
was a graduate student there was a lot
that was taught to me with regards to
Scientific Method and and data analysis
and ethical rigor in relationship to
those but the issue of hypothesis
generation was just treated as a given
and this is this is really a strange
thing because it's not only half of the
scientific Endeavor it's more like 80%
it's necessary not sufficient well yeah
it also Geniuses ask the right questions
right I mean it's a big deal and see you
made a a case for the postmodernist
critique of science in some way because
and where science was weak was on the
rationale for hypothesis generation now
you know there are people who say well
it's just algorithmic you you read the
research literature and you can figure
out the next incremental step and that's
actually true you can often figure out
the next incremental step but that
doesn't make you the kind of Genius that
leaps the field forward that's what I
call Brick in the Wall science if you
want to continue building the wall that
we already have then you can maybe put
another brick in that wall of scientific
understanding but if it turns out the
found the house that you're building is
on the wrong Foundation you'll never get
there that way yeah exact exact exactly
or you'll build a Tower of Babel because
that's what that story is about yeah
exactly and so there are there are
levels
of RA Revolution there are revolutionary
levels in hypothesis generation and the
great Geniuses are better at identifying
patterns at a more fundamental level and
that's not something that you can
predict algorithmically merely as a
consequence of Mastery of the relevant
literature even though that's helpful
and I think that's Heather I think
that's associated with trait openness
because well and openness by the way
does not predict scientific productivity
we did a study it's zero the correlation
is zero conscientiousness does and
that's Brick in the Wall science but so
imagine this so imagine a neurological
Network
where um there's a probability that any
given this is a function there's a
probability that any given idea will
activate another idea okay so that would
be like fluency the more fluent you are
the more ideas are activated whenever
you're fed an idea but then there's
distance from the original idea and you
can calculate this as statistical
improbability and there are tests of
creativity that do this so the open
people are more likely to LEAP to
Divergent associations with any given
idea and the more open they are the more
Divergent those are going to be and the
more Divergent they are the more
probability
of them being wrong but also
revolutionary right and so right right
and so that's that's really what we see
as creativity and it's something like
maybe it's something akin to mutation
probability like the O the high open
People mutate their ideas not only much
more frequently but also much more
radically and Brett I read a paper a
while back that a friend of mine sent me
showing that there's a hierarchy of M of
mutational repair in the genome h
absolutely is absolutely is it
adaptively
scheduled right so that's very much akin
to what we were discussing earlier about
the notion that there are foundational
ideas that are established by tradition
with a penumbra of variation around them
and so it turns out that the the more
deadly a mutation would be to a given
Gene the more likely it is that that
particular Gene will be repaired with
100% accuracy if it mutates and so that
also that's a way different view than
the the simpler of what would you say
yes way it's way different it's
radically different experimentation
occurs on the fringes which is why we've
had this body plan for what how long has
it been 60 million years is that right
mammals 90 100 million years is yeah
yeah when was the base with this
basically symmetric it's even older than
that right million yeah yeah exactly so
and it's variations on a theme from 500
million years yeah yeah so the question
is what's fundamental and what can be
varied without cost you're killing me
Jordan you have said in the last 15
minutes you've said 51 things that each
need a podcast unto themselves to
explore so I want to go back to a few of
them if I can recall what they were
because they're really
important um one thing just as an opener
I find it very interesting you often
speak uh about your experience of
religion and I have a very interesting
reaction to it which is um I come from
the opposite starting place and I almost
never hear you say anything that strikes
me as wrong um so I have the sense that
we are converging on a perspective and I
want to talk a little bit and so the
thing that you said happening at
Peterson academy by the way we have a
bunch of thinkers who are doing exactly
that and it is this new conver
as you as you would hope it's sort of
the the the the best indicator that you
were on the right track either you're
telling yourself a foolish story and
everybody's converged on it or you've
discovered something real and that means
it doesn't matter where your starting
point is you'll land there so um your
point about God doesn't need to exist to
answer
prayers I've long believed this such a
horrible thing to say no it's not and in
fact I wonder if you will
remember um that I said something like
that to Sam Harris in the debate where I
moderated between you two he laughed
about the idea of a a prayer answering
God and I gave him a evolutionary
account of how that could work in effect
I believe my example would have been
something like were you to pray before
going to bed about some problem that you
thought needed needed a divine
intervention in order to remedy it that
would likely Prime you to dream about
that problem and potentially to wake
with some insight about it which frankly
Waking with insights is a known
phenomenon so that is one way in which
prayer could actually manifest in an
improvement in the world that does not
require there to be an external being so
let's just take that as a stem the thing
I most want to go back
to is
you're talking you you laid out a a
principle and your principle was that
you should not
invoke uh
religious terminology or descriptions
where they are not necessary that is to
say we can explain many things without
resorting to those tools and they should
be reserved it's part of not using God's
name in vain by the way now here's the
point I want to make to you and um
frankly there's a part of me I know that
you and me and Richard Dawkins need to
have this conversation and I am sorry to
say that he has become cowardly in old
age and refuses to have the conversation
that's a that's a tragedy because I
believe a tremendous amount of
productive uh Insight would come from
that conversation he is going to talk to
me a he is going to talk to me but and I
had proposed you as an interlocutor but
he picked another gentleman who might do
a credible job yeah we need better than
credible here and I will tell you that
uh if you go back into if you go back
into Dawkins catalog you will find that
he did I've forgotten the name of it but
he did a documentary basically an
atheist new atheist documentary and
there's a scene in it that struck
me uh rather profoundly the scene is
Richard Dawkins is talking to a
religious Authority and they are having
a pitched argument about the logic of
the universe and it becomes quite clear
if you watch this that Richard Dawkins
knows he is winning this argument but so
does the other guy they are each winning
to their own audience and what they're
doing is they are missing the
opportunity to actually discover
anything and my concern is I I know
Richard Dawkins tradition because I've
read many of his books he's in I
consider him a mentor of mine and I come
from the same
the same tradition so he Richard Dawkins
is very close to seeing something
important that he hasn't seen yet that
actually makes his own work vastly more
important than it has yet I agree with
that absolutely but anyway let's let's
put him aside for the
moment the issue that I think is so
important is imagine a Continuum from
the perfectly literal to the perfectly
metaphorical and let us say that uh
religions longstanding religions that
have stood the test of time are very
close to the end of the Continuum where
they are perfectly
metaphorical and that our best cases the
places where we've been most effective
at understanding uh
phenomena that uh we now have a great
predictive model of we're very close to
being perfectly literal about and then
most things exist somewhere in in
between right biology for example we do
not have a perfectly descriptive model
because complexity and because the
process of time erasing evidence has
caused us to have a much cruder
understanding of biology than we do for
example of chemistry or physics right
we're earlier in the study it uh you
could say the same thing about
psychology but the point is it is
natural for us not to look at the vast
amount we don't know and be paralyzed by
it it is natural for us to tell the part
of the story that we can tell rigorously
in rigorous terms and to tell what we no
longer acknowledge is a metaphorical
story to fill in the spaces even this
happens even in your in your science
textbook but your science textbook
doesn't admit that that's what it's
doing that's right that's right that was
the role that Yung thought dreams played
by the way Tech that's that's exactly
his theory of dream and I would say that
what you described as that greater
ability to see across larger gaps the
point is the dream apparatus which I
would tell you has to be logically a
product of adaptive Evolution it has
served our ancestors to have it it plays
this function where the it is allowed to
violate any rule it wants to to explore
a possibility and presumably many of
those little Explorations land on
nothing and occasionally one of those
Explorations lands on a Transcendent
connection that if your waking mind was
free to make those connections at all
times you'd be in big trouble okay okay
so I I want to
modify my statement about the unreality
of God for a moment with regard to what
you just said okay so now imagine
imagine this imagine that the Revelation
that you've been praying for when you're
oriented towards the highest good makes
itself manifest and then let's say it's
valid okay so it's the valid issue that
becomes of crucial interest here because
if I have a revelation that's valid that
means I can act it out in the world and
it will have the predictive power of the
future that you described it'll be
efficacious in the world you know how
you can strike while the iron is hot
that's what you're trying to do in
Washington you think it's the right time
you know how you can aggregate a lot of
information you can have a sense of
timing it's the right thing at the right
moment okay so now imagine that that
speaks of the underlying Harmony of
being itself right and so here's a weird
thing that to add to that initial
statement is that even if God is not
real in the way that we just described
the revelations that emerge from that
Source are deeply real because they
speak of the relationship between the
individual and the social community and
the natural world in a manner that's
practically realizable and exactly timed
and so this is I think why it's
reasonable to think about God In terms
beyond the real and the non-real is
because there is that element of
non-reality it's something that
you conjure into existence as a
consequence of your quest but it's also
The Voice what's truly deepest because
otherwise it would have no purchase in
the world and
so you know the there's an ancient line
of Jewish speculation that proposes that
that that God and man are in a sense
twins that they each call the other into
being and and in a genuine Manner and I
think this mode of conceptualization
sheds some light on that in a manner
that's you know somewhat
comprehensible all right can I try two
things on you as long as we're deep down
this rabbit
hole and this is a point I have been
trying to make to Richard Dawkins which
he cannot
hear the Ancients had no idea about
genes they couldn't nor would it have
helped them
to they don't understand that they are
suffering from a kind of delusion which
is about the significance of
self self is a very temporary
instantiation
of
lineage Evolution does not care about
the self because the self is disposable
the lineage either continues or fails to
continue an evolutionary success is not
how much you reproduce it's how far into
the future your lineage is capable of
making so that's the story of Abraham by
the way you're telling me yeah yeah okay
okay so here's my
point is heaven real
yes and no we have no evidence that
there's a
place on the other hand if you live so
as to get into heaven what it will do
for reasons that a sociologist at least
a good sociologist would easily
recognize is it will place your kin and
your descendants in an excellent
position relative to each other to get
into the future do you live on after
death yes you do you live on in lineage
right it's not the individual so it's a
modification of the reality but the
point is how much difference is there
between the idea of living on after you
die in the way that any biologist would
recognize that a successful individual
did and living on after you die in some
storybook form that's much easier to
convey to a child or to an uninitiated
person right my point is that these life
after death does exist and every
biologist agrees they just don't put it
in those terms so the question
is why are we allowed to draw where in
that Continuum from the fully uh
descriptive and material to the fully
metaphorical are we allowed to draw the
line and say here is where we have
stopped being analytical if it's a
Continuum it is a Continuum and the the
place where I fault my colleague the
most is that they do not understand they
do not acknowledge the degree to which
even the models that we have inside of
biology are largely metaphorical not
because we won't ultimately know how
biology works but because we don't know
yet and you know even just to look back
into the recent history of biology you
can see that it is a question of
replacing approximate stories
metaphorical stories with literal
stories and that doesn't break down when
we get out towards what is obviously an
Adaptive tendency of human beings to
believe in a spirit realm y well look I
think that's a good place to stop I
don't want to stop because there's 50
things that we could continue to talk
about I think one of the things we
should do at some point possibly
probably publicly is I'd like to do a
lecture on Abraham and then have you
guys comment because and you know I
think too Brett one of the reasons that
when you listen to me speak about
religious matters that you don't
immediately you know come to the
conclusion that I'm making an error is
because and I really tried that in my
new book is I try not to say anything on
the religious domain that I can't
simultaneously justify on the biological
and evolutionary side and what's so
exciting is they
dovetail and and they inform each other
in a manner that's extremely useful they
can both be used as what would you say
sources of inspiration definitely what
are and when you get that conjunction
it's super powerful go ahead just one of
the things we say is that all true
stories must reconcile yeah well that's
the I think that's the monotheistic
hypothesis like in in the Old Testament
God is characterized in a multitude of
varable manners and they're quite
different you know ranging from
Peacemaker let's say to Warrior but
there's an underlying insistence that
properly conceptualized all that stems
from a fundamental Transcendent unity
and I think scientists assume that
implicitly they wouldn't be constantly
trying to unify their damn theories if
it wasn't the case and I do think that
Dawkins is missing a stellar opportunity
here because he was that far away with
his conception of memes right he he just
didn't take it the next step the irony
is there's one bitter pill for Richard
Dawkins he made a small error in his
presentation of memes that he has never
gotten over if he can accept that bitter
pill the rest of what he laid out
becomes vastly more significant in the
story of human evolution then he gives
it credit for he sees what's the bitter
pill the bitter pill is in chapter 11 of
The Selfish Gene where he presents the
concept of memes for the first time he
says that memes are a new primeval suit
he sees it as a new evolutionary realm
where creatures are beginning to form
that's not what it is it is actually a
solution it is a solution that has
evolved in the space of
genes that does the genes bidding more
effectively than they can because it can
adapt so much more rapidly because fter
memes can move horizontally it's not a
lateral solution it's Downstream yep
right right it's also faster and
incorporates virtual death because you
can kill a meme without killing its host
right this is a major this is a major
Improvement you get to be wrong and
change and you don't just die like
that's a big deal because then you can
be wrong 10,000 times instead of once
yes and it is the answer to why human
beings are so transcendently capable so
the that he's presented a model that
really is the core of what is special
about humans and yet he thinks that the
idea that the song Happy Birthday is a
meme is a good example rather than
Catholicism for
example yeah pesky Catholicism yes yes
well all right well that was fun that
was fun I think maybe what we'll do on
the daily wire side I told you I had an
insane idea that I wanted to talk to you
about
I think maybe we'll do that there we're
going to do it as a game because um it's
a joke this idea
but that doesn't mean that I know what
the idea is you know in its Essence and
I don't know that doesn't mean I know
what its significance is for one way or
another so while with that teaser for
everybody who's watching and listening
to join us on the daily we plus side I
think we'll bring this to a a close do
you want to just tell everybody
to close off the website and the X
handle for this rally in this event what
are we going to call it what's what's
the what's the term event rally rally I
think yeah there's got to be there's got
to be a better word um this uh
mindblowing moment in history
celebration celebration is a good one uh
it's called yeah celebration is a good
one it's called rescue the Republic the
website is join the resistance .org the
Twitter handle is rescue Republic and
can I make one final pitch hey fire away
okay the reason that it is so important
to show up is because we actually in
this upcoming American election are
faced with something that has
effectively declared war on our
Constitution and a brand new Coalition
that does not look like any that has
existed politically In Our Lifetime
certainly or probably
ever and that thing has to win
decisively to come to overcome any
capacity to cheat and in order to become
a durable movement and so the point is
this is the place to become visible
physically it's undeniable either the
news will fail to report it in which
case we will know something about what
side they are on or they will report it
in some way hopefully honestly but if
they don't we'll be able to see their
Distortion and that will tell us what
has taken place this is not Maga it
contains Maga but it contains many other
factions and it is truly powerful all
signals suggest people are putting aside
every important ideological difference
and standing shoulder-to-shoulder to
defend effectively our lineage and its
ability to continue into the future all
right well that's a very good place to
end thanks to both of you and to
everybody who's watching for their time
and attention to the film crew here in
Scottsdale um we'll move over to the
Daily wire side and I can tell you my
crazy idea because it's very comical as
far as I'm concerned it's ridiculously
comical all right all right good so all
right so thank you everybody for
watching and listening and uh um thanks
again Heather Brett much it's very good
to see you guys great seeing you
[Music]